Docs: new review UI guide (#5083)
recognai/rubrix: argilla/docs/how_to_guides/annotate.md

---
# Annotate your dataset

!!! note ""
    To experience the UI features firsthand, you can take a look at the [Demo ↗](https://demo.argilla.io/sign-in?auth=ZGVtbzoxMjM0NTY3OA==).

Argilla UI offers many functions to help you manage your annotation workflow, aiming to provide the most flexible approach to fit the wide variety of use cases handled by the community.

## Annotation interface overview

### Flexible layout

![UI overview](../assets/images/how_to_guides/annotate/ui_overview.png)

> The app is responsive, which enables you to adapt your workspace from two to one column. You can even use your mobile to provide simple feedback on your datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The UI is responsive with two columns for larger devices and one column for smaller devices. This enables you to annotate data using your mobile phone for simple datasets (i.e., not very long text and 1-2 questions) or resize your screen to get a more compact UI.
```

=== "Header"

    At the right side of the navigation breadcrumb, you can customize the dataset settings and edit your profile.

=== "Left pane"
    This area displays the **control panel** on the top. The control panel is used for performing keyword-based search, applying filters, and sorting the results.

    Below the control panel, the record card(s) are displayed one by one (Focus view) or in a vertical list (Bulk view). 

=== "Right pane"

>     This is where you annotate your dataset. Simply fill it out as a form, then choose to Submit, Save as Draft, or Discard to send the records to their corresponding queues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This is where you annotate your dataset. Simply fill it out as a form, then choose to `Submit`, `Save as Draft`, or `Discard` to send the records to their corresponding queues.
```

>     This is where you annotate your dataset. Simply fill it out as a form, then choose to `Submit`, `Save as Draft`, or `Discard` to send the records to their corresponding queues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This is where you annotate your dataset. Simply fill it out as a form, then choose to `Submit`, `Save as Draft`, or `Discard`.
```

=== "Left bottom panel"

>     This expandable area displays the annotation guidelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This expandable area displays the annotation guidelines. The annotation guidelines can be edited by owner and admin roles in the dataset settings.
```

=== "Right bottom panel"

    This expandable area displays your annotation progress.

### Shortcuts

The Argilla UI includes a range of shortcuts. For the main actions (submit, discard, save as draft and selecting labels) the keys are showed in the corresponding button.

To learn how to move from one question to another or between records using the keyboard, take a look at the table below.

> Shortcuts provide a smoother experience, especially with a long list of labels or single-question forms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shortcuts provide a smoother annotation experience, especially with datasets using a single question (Label, MultiLabel, Rating, or Ranking). 
```

### Suggestions

> If your dataset includes model predictions, you will see them represented by a sparkle icon `✨` in the label or value button. We call them “Suggestions” and they appear in the form as pre-filled responses. If confidence scores are provided, they will be shown with the label or value as well. Additionally, admins can choose to always show suggested labels at the beginning of the list. This can be configured from the dataset settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your dataset includes model predictions, you will see them represented by a sparkle icon `✨` in the label or value button. We call them “Suggestions” and they appear in the form as pre-filled responses. If confidence scores have been included by the dataset admin, they will be shown alongside with the label. Additionally, admins can choose to always show suggested labels at the beginning of the list. This can be configured from the dataset settings.
```

> If you agree with the suggestions, you just need to click on the Submit button, and they will be considered as your response. If the suggestion is incorrect, you can modify it and submit your final response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you agree with the suggestions, you just need to click on the `Submit` button, and they will be considered as your response. If the suggestion is incorrect, you can modify it and submit your final response.
```

### Focus view

![Focus view](../assets/images/how_to_guides/annotate/focus_view.png){ width=10% height=10% }

This is the default view to annotate your dataset linearly, displaying one record after another.

!!! tip
    You should use this when getting acquainted with a dataset or when the annotation team is very diverse, the topic is generic.

> Once you submit your first response, the next record will appear automatically. To see again your submitted record, just click on `Prev`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you submit your first response, the next record will appear automatically. To see again your submitted response, just click on `Prev`.
```

### Bulk view

![Bulk view](../assets/images/how_to_guides/annotate/bulk_view.png){ width=10% height=10% }

The bulk view is designed to speed up the annotation and get a quick overview of the whole dataset.

The bulk view displays the records in a vertical list. Once this view is active, some functions from the control panel will activate to optimize the view. You can define the number of records to display by page between `10`, `25`, `50`, `100` and whether records are shown with a fixed (`Collapse records`) or their natural height (`Expand records`).

!!! tip
    You should use this when you have a good understanding of your data and want to apply your knowledge based on things like similarity search, filter patterns, and suggestion score thresholds.

    With multiple questions, think about using the bulk view to annotate massively one question. Then, you can complete the annotation per record from the draft queue.

!!! note

>     You should consider that suggestions are not shown in bulk view (except for Spans) and that you will need to save as a draft when you are not providing responses to all required questions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Please note that suggestions are not shown in the bulk view (except for Spans). You will need to save as a draft when you are not providing responses to all required questions for the batch to be labelled.
```

### Annotation progress

The global progress of the annotation task from all users is displayed in the dataset list. This is indicated in the `Global progress` column, which shows the number of records still to be annotated, along with a progress bar. The progress bar displays the percentage and number of records submitted, conflicting (i.e., those with both submitted and discarded responses), discarded and pending by hovering your mouse over it.

You can track your annotation progress in real time from the righ-bottom panel inside the dataset page. This means that, while you are annotating, the progress bar updates as you submit or discard a record. Expanding the panel, the distribution of `Pending`, `Draft`, `Submitted` and `Discarded` responses is displayed in a donut chart.

> ## Discover patterns and speed up your annotation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use search, sort, and filters 
```

> The UI offers various features designed to enhance your understanding of data patterns and streamline annotation tasks. Combining filters with bulk annotations can save you and your team hours of time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The UI offers various features designed for data exploration and understanding. Combining these features with bulk labelling can save you and your team hours of time.
```

### Search and highlight

> From the **control panel** at the top of the left pane, you can search keywords across the entire dataset. If you have more than one field in your records, you may specify if the search is to be performed “All” fields or on a specific one. Matched results are highlighted in color.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the **control panel** at the top of the left pane, you can search by keyword across the entire dataset. If you have more than one field in your records, you may specify if the search is to be performed “All” fields or on a specific one. Matched results are highlighted in color.
```

!!! note

>     Consult these guides to know how to add vectors to your [dataset](dataset.md) and [records](record.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Check these guides to know how to add vectors to your [dataset](dataset.md) and [records](record.md).
```

>     Consult these guides to know how to add vectors to your [dataset](dataset.md) and [records](record.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Check these guides to know how to add vectors to your [dataset](dataset.md) and [records](record.md).
```

> To initiate a semantic search, click on `Find similar` within the record you wish to use as a reference. If multiple vectors are available, select the desired vector. You can also choose whether to retrieve the most or least similar records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the search by semantic similarity function, click on `Find similar` within the record you wish to use as a reference. If multiple vectors are available, select the desired vector. You can also choose whether to retrieve the most or least similar records.
```
